p8105 Homework 2
================

``` r
library(tidyverse)
```

    ## ── Attaching packages ─────────────────────────────────────── tidyverse 1.3.2 ──
    ## ✔ ggplot2 3.3.6     ✔ purrr   0.3.4
    ## ✔ tibble  3.1.8     ✔ dplyr   1.0.9
    ## ✔ tidyr   1.2.0     ✔ stringr 1.4.0
    ## ✔ readr   2.1.2     ✔ forcats 0.5.1
    ## ── Conflicts ────────────────────────────────────────── tidyverse_conflicts() ──
    ## ✖ dplyr::filter() masks stats::filter()
    ## ✖ dplyr::lag()    masks stats::lag()

``` r
options(tibble.print_min = 5)
```

# Problem 1

Read and clean the data; retain line, station name, station latitude /
longitude, routes served, entry, vending, entrance type, and ADA
compliance. Convert the entry variable from character (YES vs NO) to a
logical variable.

``` r
nyc_transit = 
  read_csv("./data/NYC_Transit_Subway_Entrance_And_Exit_Data.csv",
           col_types = cols(Route8 = "c", Route9 = "c", Route10 = "c", Route11 = "c")) %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  select(
    line, starts_with("station"), starts_with("route"), entry, exit_only, vending,          entrance_type, ada) %>% 
  mutate(entry = ifelse(entry == "YES", TRUE, FALSE))

nyc_transit
```

    ## # A tibble: 1,868 × 21
    ##   line     station_…¹ stati…² stati…³ stati…⁴ route1 route2 route3 route4 route5
    ##   <chr>    <chr>        <dbl>   <dbl> <chr>   <chr>  <chr>  <chr>  <chr>  <chr> 
    ## 1 4 Avenue 25th St       40.7   -74.0 (40.66… R      <NA>   <NA>   <NA>   <NA>  
    ## 2 4 Avenue 25th St       40.7   -74.0 (40.66… R      <NA>   <NA>   <NA>   <NA>  
    ## 3 4 Avenue 36th St       40.7   -74.0 (40.65… N      R      <NA>   <NA>   <NA>  
    ## 4 4 Avenue 36th St       40.7   -74.0 (40.65… N      R      <NA>   <NA>   <NA>  
    ## 5 4 Avenue 36th St       40.7   -74.0 (40.65… N      R      <NA>   <NA>   <NA>  
    ## # … with 1,863 more rows, 11 more variables: route6 <chr>, route7 <chr>,
    ## #   route8 <chr>, route9 <chr>, route10 <chr>, route11 <chr>, entry <lgl>,
    ## #   exit_only <chr>, vending <chr>, entrance_type <chr>, ada <lgl>, and
    ## #   abbreviated variable names ¹​station_name, ²​station_latitude,
    ## #   ³​station_longitude, ⁴​station_location
    ## # ℹ Use `print(n = ...)` to see more rows, and `colnames()` to see all variable names

The raw dataset constains 32 columns, including line, station name,
station latitude / longitude, routes served, entry, vending, entrance
type, corner, etc,. There are 1868 rows \* 21 columns in the resulting
dataset.

The process begins with data import, updates variable names, and selects
the columns that will be used in later parts fo this problem. We update
`entry` from `yes` / `no` to a logical variable. As part of data import,
we specify that `Route` columns 8-11 should be character for consistency
with 1-7.

As it stands, these data are not “tidy”: route number should be a
variable, as should route. That is, to obtain a tidy dataset we would
need to convert `route` variables from wide to long format. This will be
useful when focusing on specific routes, but may not be necessary when
considering questions that focus on station-level variables.

Then we are going to answer these questions:

-   How many distinct stations are there?

The following code chunk selects station name and line, and then uses
`distinct()` to obtain all unique combinations. As a result, the number
of rows in this dataset is the number of unique stations.

``` r
nyc_transit %>% 
  select(line, station_name) %>% 
  distinct
```

    ## # A tibble: 465 × 2
    ##   line     station_name
    ##   <chr>    <chr>       
    ## 1 4 Avenue 25th St     
    ## 2 4 Avenue 36th St     
    ## 3 4 Avenue 45th St     
    ## 4 4 Avenue 53rd St     
    ## 5 4 Avenue 59th St     
    ## # … with 460 more rows
    ## # ℹ Use `print(n = ...)` to see more rows

There are 465 distinct stations.

-   How many stations are ADA compliant?

This produces a dataframe in which the number of rows is the number of
ADA compliant stations.

``` r
nyc_transit %>% 
  filter(ada == TRUE) %>% 
  select(line, station_name) %>% 
  distinct
```

    ## # A tibble: 84 × 2
    ##   line            station_name            
    ##   <chr>           <chr>                   
    ## 1 4 Avenue        Atlantic Av-Barclays Ctr
    ## 2 4 Avenue        DeKalb Av               
    ## 3 4 Avenue        Pacific St              
    ## 4 42nd St Shuttle Grand Central           
    ## 5 6 Avenue        34th St                 
    ## # … with 79 more rows
    ## # ℹ Use `print(n = ...)` to see more rows

84 stations are ADA compliant.

-   What proportion of station entrances / exits without vending allow
    entrance?

To compute the proportion of station entrances / exits without vending
allow entrance, we first exclude station entrances that do not allow
vending. Then, we focus on the `entry` variable – this logical, so
taking the mean will produce the desired proportion.

``` r
nyc_transit %>% 
  filter(vending == "NO") %>% 
  pull(entry) %>% 
  mean
```

    ## [1] 0.3770492

37.7% of station entrances / exits without vending allow entrance.

Reformat data so that route number and route name are distinct
variables. How many distinct stations serve the A train? Of the stations
that serve the A train, how many are ADA compliant?

We convert the dataset from wide to long format, and then use `filter`,
`select`, and `distinct` statements to obtain dataframes with the
required stations in rows.

``` r
nyc_transit %>% 
  pivot_longer(
    route1:route11,
    names_to = "route_num",
    values_to = "route") %>% 
  filter(route == "A") %>% 
  select(station_name, line) %>% 
  distinct
```

    ## # A tibble: 60 × 2
    ##   station_name                  line           
    ##   <chr>                         <chr>          
    ## 1 Times Square                  42nd St Shuttle
    ## 2 125th St                      8 Avenue       
    ## 3 145th St                      8 Avenue       
    ## 4 14th St                       8 Avenue       
    ## 5 168th St - Washington Heights 8 Avenue       
    ## # … with 55 more rows
    ## # ℹ Use `print(n = ...)` to see more rows

There are 60 distinct stations serving the A train.

``` r
nyc_transit %>% 
  pivot_longer(
    route1:route11,
    names_to = "route_num",
    values_to = "route") %>% 
  filter(route == "A" & ada == TRUE) %>% 
  select(station_name, line) %>% 
  distinct
```

    ## # A tibble: 17 × 2
    ##    station_name                  line            
    ##    <chr>                         <chr>           
    ##  1 14th St                       8 Avenue        
    ##  2 168th St - Washington Heights 8 Avenue        
    ##  3 175th St                      8 Avenue        
    ##  4 34th St                       8 Avenue        
    ##  5 42nd St                       8 Avenue        
    ##  6 59th St                       8 Avenue        
    ##  7 Inwood - 207th St             8 Avenue        
    ##  8 West 4th St                   8 Avenue        
    ##  9 World Trade Center            8 Avenue        
    ## 10 Times Square-42nd St          Broadway        
    ## 11 59th St-Columbus Circle       Broadway-7th Ave
    ## 12 Times Square                  Broadway-7th Ave
    ## 13 8th Av                        Canarsie        
    ## 14 Franklin Av                   Franklin        
    ## 15 Euclid Av                     Fulton          
    ## 16 Franklin Av                   Fulton          
    ## 17 Howard Beach                  Rockaway

Of the stations that serve the A train, 17 stations are ADA compliant.

# Problem 2

Firstly we read and clean the Mr. Trash Wheel sheet:

``` r
mr_tw = 
  readxl::read_excel("./data/Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
                     sheet = "Mr. Trash Wheel", range = "A2:N549") %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  filter(!is.na(dumpster)) %>% 
  mutate(
    sports_balls = as.integer(round(sports_balls, 0)),
    trash_wheel = "Mr.",
    year = as.integer(year)
    )

mr_tw
```

    ## # A tibble: 547 × 15
    ##   dumpster month  year date                weight_tons volume_…¹ plast…² polys…³
    ##      <dbl> <chr> <int> <dttm>                    <dbl>     <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>
    ## 1        1 May    2014 2014-05-16 00:00:00        4.31        18    1450    1820
    ## 2        2 May    2014 2014-05-16 00:00:00        2.74        13    1120    1030
    ## 3        3 May    2014 2014-05-16 00:00:00        3.45        15    2450    3100
    ## 4        4 May    2014 2014-05-17 00:00:00        3.1         15    2380    2730
    ## 5        5 May    2014 2014-05-17 00:00:00        4.06        18     980     870
    ## # … with 542 more rows, 7 more variables: cigarette_butts <dbl>,
    ## #   glass_bottles <dbl>, grocery_bags <dbl>, chip_bags <dbl>,
    ## #   sports_balls <int>, homes_powered <dbl>, trash_wheel <chr>, and abbreviated
    ## #   variable names ¹​volume_cubic_yards, ²​plastic_bottles, ³​polystyrene
    ## # ℹ Use `print(n = ...)` to see more rows, and `colnames()` to see all variable names

Then use a similar process to import, clean, and organize the data for
Professor Trash Wheel:

``` r
prof_tw = 
  readxl::read_excel("./data/Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", 
                     sheet = "Professor Trash Wheel", range = "A2:M96") %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  filter(!is.na(dumpster)) %>% 
  mutate(
    trash_wheel = "Professor",
    year = as.integer(year)
    )

prof_tw
```

    ## # A tibble: 94 × 14
    ##   dumpster month     year date                weight_t…¹ volum…² plast…³ polys…⁴
    ##      <dbl> <chr>    <int> <dttm>                   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>
    ## 1        1 January   2017 2017-01-02 00:00:00       1.79      15    1950    6080
    ## 2        2 January   2017 2017-01-30 00:00:00       1.58      15    9540   11230
    ## 3        3 February  2017 2017-02-26 00:00:00       2.32      18    8350    9210
    ## 4        4 February  2017 2017-02-26 00:00:00       3.72      15    8590    1030
    ## 5        5 February  2017 2017-02-28 00:00:00       1.45      15    7830    9950
    ## # … with 89 more rows, 6 more variables: cigarette_butts <dbl>,
    ## #   glass_bottles <dbl>, grocery_bags <dbl>, chip_bags <dbl>,
    ## #   homes_powered <dbl>, trash_wheel <chr>, and abbreviated variable names
    ## #   ¹​weight_tons, ²​volume_cubic_yards, ³​plastic_bottles, ⁴​polystyrene
    ## # ℹ Use `print(n = ...)` to see more rows, and `colnames()` to see all variable names

Combine those two dataframs to produce a single tidy dataset.

``` r
tw_tidy = 
  bind_rows(mr_tw, prof_tw) %>% 
  select(trash_wheel, everything())

tw_tidy
```

    ## # A tibble: 641 × 15
    ##   trash_wheel dumpster month  year date                weight_…¹ volum…² plast…³
    ##   <chr>          <dbl> <chr> <int> <dttm>                  <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>
    ## 1 Mr.                1 May    2014 2014-05-16 00:00:00      4.31      18    1450
    ## 2 Mr.                2 May    2014 2014-05-16 00:00:00      2.74      13    1120
    ## 3 Mr.                3 May    2014 2014-05-16 00:00:00      3.45      15    2450
    ## 4 Mr.                4 May    2014 2014-05-17 00:00:00      3.1       15    2380
    ## 5 Mr.                5 May    2014 2014-05-17 00:00:00      4.06      18     980
    ## # … with 636 more rows, 7 more variables: polystyrene <dbl>,
    ## #   cigarette_butts <dbl>, glass_bottles <dbl>, grocery_bags <dbl>,
    ## #   chip_bags <dbl>, sports_balls <int>, homes_powered <dbl>, and abbreviated
    ## #   variable names ¹​weight_tons, ²​volume_cubic_yards, ³​plastic_bottles
    ## # ℹ Use `print(n = ...)` to see more rows, and `colnames()` to see all variable names

The tw_tidy dataset is the combination of **Mr. Trash Wheel** and
**Professor Trash Wheel**. There are 641 observations in total. The
variables “trash_wheel” (**Mr.** and **Professor**) make each
observation distinct. And there are 15 columns, of which the
“sports_balls” variable only works for Mr. Trash Wheel. Besides, other
columns include year, date, glass bottles, grocery bags, home powered,
etc,.

The following chunks of code are going to answer these questions: for
available data, what was the total weight of trash collected by
Professor Trash Wheel? What was the total number of sports balls
collected by Mr. Trash Wheel in 2020?

``` r
tw_tidy %>% 
  filter(trash_wheel == "Professor") %>% 
  select(weight_tons) %>% 
  sum
```

    ## [1] 190.12

The total weight of trash collected by Professor Trash Wheel is 190.12
tons.

``` r
tw_tidy %>% 
  filter(trash_wheel == "Mr." & year == 2020) %>% 
  select(sports_balls) %>% 
  sum
```

    ## [1] 856

The total number of sports balls collected by Mr. Trash Wheel in 2020 is
856.

# Problem 3

First, clean the data in pols-month.csv. Use `separate()` to break up
the variable `mon` into integer variables `year`, `month`, and `day`;
replace month number with month name; create a `president` variable
taking values `gop` and `dem`, and remove `prez_dem` and `prez_gop`; and
remove the day variable.

``` r
pols_df = read_csv("./data/fivethirtyeight_datasets/pols-month.csv") %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  separate(mon, into = c("year", "month", "day"), sep = "-") %>% 
  mutate(
    month = month.name[as.integer(month)],
    year = as.integer(year),
    president = ifelse(prez_gop == 1, "gop", "dem")
  ) %>% 
  select(-prez_dem, -prez_gop, -day)
```

    ## Rows: 822 Columns: 9
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## dbl  (8): prez_gop, gov_gop, sen_gop, rep_gop, prez_dem, gov_dem, sen_dem, r...
    ## date (1): mon
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
pols_df
```

    ## # A tibble: 822 × 9
    ##    year month    gov_gop sen_gop rep_gop gov_dem sen_dem rep_dem president
    ##   <int> <chr>      <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl> <chr>    
    ## 1  1947 January       23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ## 2  1947 February      23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ## 3  1947 March         23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ## 4  1947 April         23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ## 5  1947 May           23      51     253      23      45     198 dem      
    ## # … with 817 more rows
    ## # ℹ Use `print(n = ...)` to see more rows

Second, clean the data in snp.csv using a similar process to the above.
For consistency across datasets, arrange according to year and month,
and organize so that `year` and `month` are the leading columns.

``` r
snp_df = read_csv("./data/fivethirtyeight_datasets/snp.csv") %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  mutate(
    date = lubridate::parse_date_time2(date, orders = "mdy", cutoff_2000 = 23)
  ) %>% 
    separate(date, into = c("year", "month", "day"), sep = "-") %>% 
  mutate(
    month = as.integer(month),
    year = as.integer(year)
  ) %>% 
  arrange(year, month) %>% 
  mutate(month = month.name[month]) %>% 
  select(year, month, close)
```

    ## Rows: 787 Columns: 2
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (1): date
    ## dbl (1): close
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
snp_df
```

    ## # A tibble: 787 × 3
    ##    year month    close
    ##   <int> <chr>    <dbl>
    ## 1  1950 January   17.0
    ## 2  1950 February  17.2
    ## 3  1950 March     17.3
    ## 4  1950 April     18.0
    ## 5  1950 May       18.8
    ## # … with 782 more rows
    ## # ℹ Use `print(n = ...)` to see more rows

Third, tidy the unemployment data so that it can be merged with the
previous datasets. This process will involve switching from “wide” to
“long” format; ensuring that key variables have the same name; and
ensuring that key variables take the same values.

``` r
unemployment = read_csv("./data/fivethirtyeight_datasets/unemployment.csv") %>%
  rename(year = Year) %>% 
  pivot_longer( 
    Jan:Dec,
    names_to = "month", 
    values_to = "unemployment") %>% 
  mutate(
    month = plyr::mapvalues(month, from = month.abb, to = month.name),
    year = as.integer(year))
```

    ## Rows: 68 Columns: 13
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## dbl (13): Year, Jan, Feb, Mar, Apr, May, Jun, Jul, Aug, Sep, Oct, Nov, Dec
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
unemployment
```

    ## # A tibble: 816 × 3
    ##    year month    unemployment
    ##   <int> <chr>           <dbl>
    ## 1  1948 January           3.4
    ## 2  1948 February          3.8
    ## 3  1948 March             4  
    ## 4  1948 April             3.9
    ## 5  1948 May               3.5
    ## # … with 811 more rows
    ## # ℹ Use `print(n = ...)` to see more rows

Join the datasets by merging `snp` into `pols`, and merging
`unemployment` into the result.

``` r
result1 = full_join(pols_df, snp_df)
```

    ## Joining, by = c("year", "month")

``` r
final_version = full_join(result1, unemployment)
```

    ## Joining, by = c("year", "month")

``` r
final_version
```

    ## # A tibble: 828 × 11
    ##    year month    gov_gop sen_gop rep_gop gov_dem sen_dem rep_dem president close
    ##   <int> <chr>      <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl>   <dbl> <chr>     <dbl>
    ## 1  1947 January       23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ## 2  1947 February      23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ## 3  1947 March         23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ## 4  1947 April         23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ## 5  1947 May           23      51     253      23      45     198 dem          NA
    ## # … with 823 more rows, and 1 more variable: unemployment <dbl>
    ## # ℹ Use `print(n = ...)` to see more rows, and `colnames()` to see all variable names

The first raw dataset pols-month.csv contains 9 variablea. The `mon`
indicates the year, month, and day. Other columns such as gov_gop and
sen_dem are included. We created a `president` variable taking values
gop and dem. The second dataset `snp` also has the `date` variable with
2-digit years. It has another column named `close`. The `unemployment`
dataset has the `Year` variable and other 12 columns named by 12 months.
This table reports the unemployment rate of each month in every year. We
converted this dataset from `wide` to `long`.

We got the resulting dataset `final_version`. It has 828 rows \* 11
columns. The year range is from 1947 to 2015. There are some missing
values at the last few months in 2015. In addition, there is no `close`
data from 1947 to 1949, and no `unemployment` data in 1947. The
resulting dataset is merged from the 3 datasets above by `year` and
`month`. Variables `gov_gop`, `sen_gop`, `rep_gop`, `gov_dem`,
`sen_dem`, `rep_dem`, `president`, `close`, and `unemployment` are
retained.
